<h1>On Writing Well</h1>
<h4>By William Zinsser</h4>

I picked up this book about non-fiction writing when I was starting to write my first manuscript. At the time, I was also writing a revised research plan after finally really working out what I wanted to do with my PhD. It was a nice, easy read - I'm coming to value PhD work time where I can gently absorb something that will add to my skills or understanding rather than going at full pelt all the time. Reading the book gave me an opportunity to reflect on my writing process and I'd like to summarise the ones that were the most helpful for my PhD journey here. 

NB. Part of the reason I'm writing these blogs is to improve my writing over time. Please don't judge me too harshly on the irony if I haven’t yet managed to master some of the skills I'm writing about!

<h3>1. Re-writing</h3>

I've always felt that there was some kind of shame in needing to re-write, like re-writing meant admitting that your unfiltered instinct wasn't good enough. I'd struggled with this in the first serious piece of writing I'd sent to my supervisors, being endlessly anxious about how much time I'd spent writing three serious versions and many other smaller versions. Zinsser communicates very strongly that the only way to be a good writer is to write, re-write and re-write. 

One of the most important gifts re-writing has given me so far is the ability to relax when I'm giving a piece of writing a first go. Can't quite think of the right word? That's ok. Let your subconscious find it later. Not sure about the order of paragraphs or points? Doesn't matter. Your fresh brain will come to it next time and solve the problem. It's actually quite amazing how much this has helped me already! Zinsser points out that your best writing will come when you are the most relaxed, and I'm starting to see that reflected in my writing. Worrying about getting it perfect the first time really doesn't help! 

Zinsser also draws attention to the fact that everyone manages to write many more words than are necessary in their first draft. I'm not sure why this is - but he does suggest that a key part of any good writer's progress is ruthlessly cutting out any superfluous matter. I've found being aware of this really helpful in my writing. Other things I've become hyper-aware of, which have really improved my writing, are checking that I'm writing with a consistent tone, ensuring I don't try to make too many points in one sentence or paragraph and making sure the story is coherent - that I haven't missed logical steps in my writing just because a topic is so familiar to me that I don't notice.

<h3>2. Reading out-loud

In my re-writing process, I've also added in a read-aloud step. Zinsser suggests that most people read by 'listening' to the sentences inside their heads, and since then, I haven't been able to un-hear the little reading voice inside my head. So I've been asking myself the questions: Does it sound 'nice'? Is it easy to say? Are the sentences so long that I need to stop to take a breath part way through? In my first attempts at writing and re-writing after reading the book, this was ridiculously helpful in that it enabled me to see the repetitive and unnecessary words I'd been using in my flow state, as well as assisting me with unleashing a little bit of musical creativity in my writing.

<h3>3. Having a dictionary on hand</h3>

Re-writing has also helped me to embrace some linguistic creativity in my work. As it turns out, I, apparently just like everyone else, have a habit of re-using my favourite words over and over. Mine are rather random and include the, although, discourse and while. I've now added a dictionary app to my dock so that I can quickly and easily consult a thesaurus and dictionary when I'm writing and re-writing. I've found joy in mindfully choosing the word that means what I want it to and sounds exactly right.

<h3>4. Picking your points</h3>

In my reading out-loud process in particular, I've come to a better understanding of why choosing key points has always been a MASSIVE issue for me. It seems like a no brainer in theory, but I'm always getting caught up in my passion and interest in topics, and trying to explain everything as an intricate web of all the possible causes, all the possible effects - all the interconnected ideas that light up in my brain when I'm thinking about the topic. I guess this is how a good teacher's mind should work - in the classroom, it helped me identify as many connections between a topic and the interests and experiences of my students as possible. In good writing though, if you're going to avoid overloading your reader, Zinsser says that it's important to just pick one key point that you want your reader to leave with. His advice: collect more material than you need - then pick the bits that best back up your points. This has been very useful to me - it's allowed me to explore topics in all the breadth and depth that I'd like to, but also enabled me to give myself permission to just use the points that make the most sense, or are the most solidly backed up by literature. There are hundreds of ways you can argue that your project is great - but picking the one that is going to be most persuasive for your chosen audience is way more likely to catch their attention than explaining all of them.

<h3>4. Paragraph structure</h3>

In trying to improve the coherence of my writing, paragraph structure was an issue I tried to dive head-long into. I had decided when I started my PhD that it was time to get serious about my writing, that it was time to get rid of the flow of consciousness rubbish from my coursework days. I tried to force myself into following the PEEL (point, explain, example, link?) structure advocated by English teachers, in an effort to write in the 'right' way. The result? Rigid, lifeless writing that was difficult and stressful to write. Turns out, allowing that flow of consciousness is a much better way to write with your authentic voice, and it often links ideas together quite nicely without you having to worry about it. I don't know what the solution is yet, but I'm going to try enabling that flow voice on my first few drafts, and keep the PEEL lens for examining my re-writes. Hopefully, this will help me find a nice balance between authenticity and coherence. 

The parts of my paragraphs that are getting the bulk of my time as I try to improve my writing are the first, second and last sentences. Zinsser emphasises the importance of the first and second sentences in 'hooking' in the interest of the reader, and I think it's a shame we don't think about this more in academic writing. We are often so focussed on communicating the facts or research story, that we forget we have tired students and academics reading our work, and anything we can do to help them ready our story will be good for both us and them. I often find it really tough to come up with a good first sentence, and I must admit that sometimes I just give up. What I have noticed though, is that often when I give my brain a break and do something else, sometimes, those key sentences just come together. Coming back another day and looking at it with a fresh mind has also been a helpful strategy. When it comes to the last sentence, I particularly like the way Zinsser conceptualises it as a 'springboard' into the next paragraph that ideally will linger in the mind of the reader. I haven't gotten very far into incorporating this one into my writing yet but I'll let you know when I do!

<h3>5. Finding a style for your academic writing</h3>

An element of the writing process which I haven't yet figured out how to use is my authentic voice. Zinsser talks a lot about finding your authentic and relaxed voice in writing, and I suspect that this is going to be a tough and uphill battle in my academic journey. How do you strike the balance between using your authentic voice and following the writing conventions of your field? What if you're thoroughly unconvinced about the cleverness of the way your field writes? What if you're working across two fields that have something like polar opposite writing conventions (for me, that's science and education)? What if you're a mere student and don't yet really have the authority to have an opinion about any of this? Eek! I don't know what I'm going to do. But I do know that I want to try to challenge the status quo in small ways, where I can. I believe strongly in open research, particularly when the research has stakeholders that typically don't have access to peer-reviewed literature, like teachers. I also feel like the way we write in science is some kind of weird attempt to maintain authority and power over our topics of expertise - it's not open or inviting in any way. I hope by insisting on writing in ways that are interesting and accessible to teachers and secondary students, without compromising on the rigour or quality of my work, I can set even a small example of a possibility of looking at things differently.

<h3>6. Writing regularly</h3>

The last two ideas I'd like to play with are more about the board writing process. According to Zinsser, the more you write, the easier it gets. When I started my PhD, I'd been teaching for four years and out of formal tertiary education for two. It's amazing how quickly the skills of eloquently putting your thoughts into clear academic writing slips into a place in your brain that's difficult and scratchy to find and use. On the other hand, my ability to quickly and easily write difficult ideas clearly and in casual language appropriate for teenagers stuns my new colleagues. It was hard to start writing academically again, and the enormity of the task has been putting me off for the last eighteen months. It felt like even a small blog would take too long to perfect. But the more I've had to write abstracts and short papers, the easier it's gotten, and blogs are starting to seem more achievable. Being open minded about trying to identify topics I might be able to start writing about has also helped - this reading reflection is hopefully the first example of 'easier' writing that will help me write about the more difficult stuff later.

I think that they key might be finding things you like to write about, and writing about those things in a small way, as regularly as possible. [@Olivia](https://github.com/olivia-mc) in my group does this by writing tiny literature reviews all the time. I think this is a great idea, but it hasn't quite worked for me because I keep trying to bite off more than I can reasonably chew (i.e. trying to write half my thesis every month). [@Kymberley](https://github.com/kym834) is all about open science and publishes her electronic laboratory notebook (ELN) online regularly. I am going to try to take my inspiration from the two of them combined and write small chunks about whatever I can, as much as I can.  Maybe my blogs and reflections can be some sort of lab notebook equivalent, which draws on some literature but isn't so scary as a thesis chapter. 

<h3>7. Keeping an eye on the final product - or not</h3>

Talking of theses, I liked this phrase I pulled from the book: 'Being focussed on making something amazing is like constantly putting yourself in checkmate'. A thesis is a particularly large body of work - three to four years - and almost all of us start by wanting to create something amazing. This is anxiety-inducing at best. Zinsser suggests that focussing on the process, enjoying it and learning from it is what's really important - and if you do this, the final product should slowly crystallise for you. It's been helpful to remind myself that I signed up to do this PhD for me, for my learning, and my growth. Finding my personal connection between my experiences and goals and my project helps to centre me, and reminding myself how this project fits into the bigger picture of what I want to achieve in my life motivates me. I enjoy my work much more every day when the majority of my work is directed by my own personal goals. 

  <h3>Concluding thoughts</h3>

In short, finding a relaxed and centred mindset in which to write, and taking your time to come back and re-write multiple times with a fresh mind, seems to be the best way to end up with a beautiful and polished final product. Finding a way to enjoy the process, and using that enjoyment to encourage yourself to write small amounts regularly, sounds like a clever way to approach your thesis. The former idea is working extremely well for me at the moment - the latter, well, I'll let you know in a few years. 

I've done this piece of writing for me, to help me practice writing. I've also done it to help me record my research journey, in a kind of open-research process way (I'm still playing with this idea). Some of the most helpful conference presentations I've been at so far have been those where researchers were quite candid and detailed about their journey to where they are now, so I'm going to try to model that where I can. I hope that one day I might pass for a strong writer, and someone might find strength in coming back to this day and realising it wasn't always so!!
